docs(cockpit): added documentation on how to add custom logs from k8s cluster to cockpit int-add-observability (#4149)
scaleway/docs-content: observability/cockpit/how-to/send-log-from-k8s-to-cockpit.mdx

externalServices:
  loki:
    host: "$COCKPIT_CUSTOM_DATASOURCE_HOST"
    tenantId: "$COCKPIT_TOKEN"
    authMode: none
    externalLabels: {
      cluster: "$SCW_CLUSTER_NAME"
    }

logs:
  enabled: true
  pod_logs:
    enabled: true
    discovery: "all"
    # This annotation is mandatory to gather your logs
    annotation: "cockpit.scw.cloud/logs.autogather"
    # -- Only capture logs from pods in these namespaces (`[]` means all namespaces).
    namespaces: []
    # -- Do not capture logs from any pods in these namespaces.
    excludeNamespaces: []

metrics:
  enabled: false
kube-state-metrics:
  enabled: false
prometheus-node-exporter:
  enabled: false
prometheus-operator-crds:
  enabled: false
opencost:
  enabled: false

alloy:
  logging:
    level: info
    format: logfmt
alloy-events:
  logging:
    level: info
    format: logfmt
alloy-logs:
  logging:
    # -- Level at which Alloy log lines should be written.
    level: info
    # -- Format to use for writing Alloy log lines.
    format: logfmt
```

<Message type="info">
The template above is only an example to send logs to your Cockpit. You can also send metrics to Cockpit using this Helm chart.

> You can check our guide to [send metrics from your cluster to Cockpit](// ADD LINK TO METRICS TUTO)

Author: I added a cross-link to the documentation on how to send metrics from cluster to cockpit, this should be replaced by the correct link of the documentation once it is released, the documentation is on #4176

---
meta:
  title: How to send logs from your Kubernetes cluster to your Cockpit
  description: Learn how to send your pod logs to your Cockpit using Scaleway's comprehensive guide. This tutorial covers sending Kubernetes pods logs to Scaleway's Cockpit for centralized monitoring and analysis using Grafana, ensuring efficient monitoring and log analysis in your infrastructure.
content:
  h1: How to send logs from your Kubernetes cluster to your Cockpit
  paragraph: Learn how to send your pod logs to your Cockpit using Scaleway's comprehensive guide. This tutorial covers sending Kubernetes pods logs to Scaleway's Cockpit for centralized monitoring and analysis using Grafana, ensuring efficient monitoring and log analysis in your infrastructure.
tags: kubernetes cockpit logs observability monitoring cluster
categories:
  - observability
dates:

>   validation: TBD
>   posted: TBD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  validation: 2025/01/03
  posted: 2025/01/03
```

---

> This page shows you how to send your application logs created in a Kubernetes cluster to your Cockpit either by using a Helm Chart or by deploying this Helm chart with Terraform.
> 
> In this example, we use [k8s-monitoring](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/grafana/k8s-monitoring/1.6.16) which install an Alloy Daemon set to your Kubernetes Cluster to export logs to your Cockpit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page shows you how to send application logs created in a Kubernetes cluster to your Cockpit either by using a Helm chart or by deploying a Helm chart with [Terraform](https://www.terraform.io/).

In this example, we use [k8s-monitoring](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/grafana/k8s-monitoring/1.6.16) which installs an Alloy Daemon set to your Kubernetes cluster to export logs to your Cockpit.
```

<Macro id="requirements" />

 - A Scaleway account logged into the [console](https://console.scaleway.com)
 - [Owner](/identity-and-access-management/iam/concepts/#owner) status or [IAM permissions](/identity-and-access-management/iam/concepts/#permission) allowing you to perform actions in the intended Organization

>  - [Created](/observability/cockpit/how-to/create-external-data-sources/) an custom external data source
>  - [Created](/observability/cockpit/how-to/create-token/) a Cockpit Token for the same region as the data source
>  - A running Kubernetes Cluster containing your application deployed
>  - For Terraform : [Created](/identity-and-access-management/iam/how-to/create-api-keys/) an API key and retrieved your API secret key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - [Created](/observability/cockpit/how-to/create-external-data-sources/) a custom external data source
 - [Created](/observability/cockpit/how-to/create-token/) a Cockpit token for the same region as the data source
 - A running Kubernetes cluster containing your application deployed
 - [Created](/identity-and-access-management/iam/how-to/create-api-keys/) an API key and retrieved your API secret key
```

> 
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

<Message type="important">
  - Sending logs for Scaleway resources or personal data using an external path is a billable feature. In addition, any data that you push yourself is billed, even if you send data from Scaleway products. Refer to the [product pricing](https://www.scaleway.com/en/pricing/?tags=available,managedservices-observability-cockpit) for more information.
<Message/>

## Configure the Helm chart

> Create a `values.yml` file to configure your Helm chart, here is an example: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a `values.yml` file to configure your Helm chart, using the example below. Make sure that you replace `$SCW_CLUSTER_NAME` with the name of your Scaleway Kubernetes cluster, `$COCKPIT_CUSTOM_DATASOURCE_HOST` with the hostname of your custom endpoint (excluding the `/loki/api/v1/push` part), and `$COCKPIT_TOKEN` with your Cockpit token.
```

> <Message type="Note">
>   Do not forget to replace: 
>   - `$SCW_CLUSTER_NAME` by the name of your Scaleway Cluster
>   - `$COCKPIT_CUSTOM_DATASOURCE_HOST` by the hostname of your custom endpoint (do not include the `/loki/api/v1/push` )
>   - `$COCKPIT_TOKEN` by your Cockpit Token
> <Message/>
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```yaml
cluster:
      name: "$SCW_CLUSTER_NAME"
externalServices:
  loki:
    host: "$COCKPIT_CUSTOM_DATASOURCE_HOST"
    tenantId: "$COCKPIT_TOKEN"
    authMode: none
    externalLabels: {
      cluster: "$SCW_CLUSTER_NAME"
    }

logs:
  enabled: true
  pod_logs:
    enabled: true
    discovery: "all"
    # This annotation is mandatory to gather your logs
    annotation: "cockpit.scw.cloud/logs.autogather"
    # -- Only capture logs from pods in these namespaces (`[]` means all namespaces).
    namespaces: []
    # -- Do not capture logs from any pods in these namespaces.
    excludeNamespaces: []

metrics:
  enabled: false
kube-state-metrics:
  enabled: false
prometheus-node-exporter:
  enabled: false
prometheus-operator-crds:
  enabled: false
opencost:
  enabled: false

alloy:
  logging:
    level: info
    format: logfmt
alloy-events:
  logging:
    level: info
    format: logfmt
alloy-logs:
  logging:
    # -- Level at which Alloy log lines should be written.
    level: info
    # -- Format to use for writing Alloy log lines.
    format: logfmt
```

<Message type="info">

> - Note that this is only an example to send logs to your cockpit, you can also send metrics to cockpit using this Helm chart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The template above is only an example to send logs to your Cockpit. You can also send metrics to Cockpit using this Helm chart.
```

</Message>

## Send Kubernetes logs to your Cockpit using Helm chart

> 1. Connect your kubectl to your Scaleway Cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Connect your kubectl to your Kubernetes cluster
```

> 2. Apply your Helm chart with the `values.yml` file by running

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Run the following command to apply your Helm chart with the `values.yml` file:
```

  ```
  helm install -f /your-path/to/values.yml my-log-ingester k8s-monitoring --version 1.6.16
  ```

>   Do not forget to change the -f flag with the correct path to your `values.yml` file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Make sure that you replace the `-f` flag with the correct path to your `values.yml` file
```

## Send Kubernetes logs to your Cockpit using Helm chart with Terraform

> 1. Set up the Helm Terraform provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Set up the Helm Terraform provider:
```

  ```terraform
  provider "helm" {
    kubernetes {
      host = your_k8s_cluster_host
      token = your_k8s_cluster_token
      cluster_ca_certificate = base64decode(
      your_k8s_cluster_ca_certificate
      )
    }
  }
  ```

> 2. Create a Helm release ressource with the path to your `values.yml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create a Helm release resource with the path to your `values.yml`:
```

  ```
  resource "helm_release" "log-ingester" {
    name = "my-log-ingester"
    repository = "https://grafana.github.io/helm-charts"
    chart = "k8s-monitoring"
    version = "1.6.16"

    namespace = "log-ingester"
    create_namespace = true
    values = [file("/your-path/to/values.yml")]
  }
  ```

> 3. Apply the new terraform configuration with `terraform apply`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Run `terraform apply` to apply the new Terraform configuration.
```

> ## Explore your logs 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Explore your logs in Grafana
```

Now that your logs are exported to your Cockpit, you can access and query them.

> 1. Open your Cockpit Dashboard
> 2. Click the **Home** icon > **Explore**. Select your custom data source in the upper left corner.
> 3. Filter the query by only searching for the label `cluster` with the value corresponding to your cluster name and your log should display

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click **Cockpit** in the Observability section of the [console](https://console.scaleway.com/) side menu. The **Cockpit** overview page displays.
2. Click **Open dashboards** to open your managed dashboards in Grafana. You are redirected to the Grafana website.
3. Click the **Home** icon > **Explore**. Select your custom data source in the upper left corner.
4. Filter the query by only searching for the label `cluster` with the value corresponding to your cluster name and your logs should display.
```
